In the Mekong Delta, a French
archaeologist digs at Oc Eo and pulls up
a tiny gold coin with a Roman emperor's
face. But it isn't money. It has a crude
little loop for a cord. Someone wore it.
Oc Eo is deep in Vietnam, thousands of
miles from the Roman world. How does an
emperor's portrait end up here? And if
this piece is a copy instead of a
Rome-minted coin, the question gets
better. Where did the model come from?
Even if the Oc Eo piece is a copy, it
still points to something real upstream.
A genuine Roman coin or an earlier copy
made from one likely reached a workshop
somewhere in the Indian Ocean world long
enough for its portrait to be copied.
After that, the image could travel
farther than the coin ever did. Chinese
records say a group claiming to
represent Daqin arrived by sea in 166 AD
from beyond the frontier of Rinan, south
of Jiaozhi. Many historians read this as
merchants and intermediaries, not proof
of Roman ships reaching Vietnam. So, if
Romans didn't bring it, who did? To
understand how, we'll follow the story
of one Roman coin and its journey east
to Vietnam. Or more precisely, how a
Roman coin and then its portrait could
be copied, repurposed, and carried east
through the Indian Ocean world. Of
course, we cannot know the exact path
any of these coins or artifacts took,
but let's simplify this entire journey.
Let's imagine, approximate, and trace
the trade network Rome plugged into
crossing the Mediterranean, the Near
East, India, and Southeast Asia, and see
how along the way our coin stops being
money at all and becomes something else.
The year was the early to mid-1940s.
World War II raged on, and Indochina was
under intense wartime pressure and
changing control arrangements.
Despite the disruptions, the French
archaeologist Louis Malleret was able to
conduct major surveys and excavations at
Oc Eo in the far south of the country,
building on earlier reconnaissance and
expanding the scale of work.
The area of attention was Oc Eo, long
suspected as an ancient site of
importance and sometimes linked by
modern scholars to Cattigara, a Far East
port named in Ptolemy's 2nd century
Geography. This identification is
debated and not settled. Also relevant
in the written record is the 1st century
Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, which
doesn't describe Oc Eo directly, but
lays out the Red Sea to India trade
highway that fed the same chain of
exchanges. Oc Eo was likely part of the
broader Funan world during the period
from around the 1st to 6th century AD,
known mainly through Chinese sources.
Funan is best understood as an early
Mekong-centered polity with strong links
across the Gulf of Thailand and into
wider maritime trade. This was a
lucrative world of long-distance
exchange with cultural and religious
links, as well as trade. Through this
network, valuables from far-flung
regions, including the Mediterranean
world, could arrive indirectly, often
via South Asia. Malleret's work revealed
a wide range of finds, including gems
and South Asian religious imagery
reflecting the spread of Indian ideas
and iconography into Southeast Asia. But
among the most intriguing objects
associated with Oc Eo was something
else, a gold piece bearing the
unmistakable face of a Roman emperor. In
reports tied to Oc Eo, the best known
Roman faced pieces are now typically
identified as locally made gold pendants
copying Roman aurei. One is a thin gold
sheet pendant copying a coin type of
Antoninus Pius, its prototype dated to
152, and another is a thicker cast
one-sided pendant copying a coin type of
Commodus from around 192. The latter,
sometimes misidentified in older
tellings as Marcus Aurelius. For
researchers, these pieces were striking
not because they proved Roman sailors
reached Vietnam, but because they showed
Roman gold and Roman imagery had entered
the long chain of exchanges linking the
Mediterranean, India, and Southeast
Asia. And the pendant's suspension
feature is the clue to its meaning.
Whatever its exact path, this was no
longer just money. It was prestige you
could wear. Now, let's go back some
1,800 years to the beginning of this
journey, before the emperor's portrait
spanned the globe and create this
scenario. The year was somewhere in the
Antonine era, 2nd century AD, and an
imperial mint craftsman labored late
into the evening. This was part of the
empire's monetary system, producing a
range of denominations including bronze
asses, silver denarii, and high-value
gold aurei. In special cases, ceremonial
pieces in precious metal could also be
struck for gifting and display, blurring
the line between money and message. For
our story, imagine a real Roman aureus
of the kind later copied in the East,
freshly struck under Antoninus Pius or
later Commodus. Antoninus Pius reigned
as emperor for a long and relatively
stable period, commanding an empire near
the height of its power. If you prefer
the later prototype, Commodus ruled
after Marcus Aurelius and his coin
portraits also became models. As the
current ruler, it was the emperor's
features that were imprinted onto these
coins using engraved dies. Gold was
melted, formed into blanks, and struck
to create a durable portrait and legend.
A hot flan pinched in tongs, a die
aligned, and a hammer blow that rings
like iron on stone.
A new coin had now been born. From
there, coins could move through multiple
official and private channels, state and
imperial treasuries, military pay,
taxes, and merchant networks before
reaching private hands. What follows is
a plausible reconstruction. We can't
trace one specific coin step by step,
but we can follow real routes and real
incentives. The coin entering
circulation through a payment tied to
Rome's vast supply system handled by a
merchant engaged in state-linked trade.
A contract is agreed, payment is made,
and the gold aureus drops into a leather
pouch. He thinks he's being paid for
business. He has no idea he's holding
onto something that can travel far
beyond the world he knows. Out on the
open road, the coin can begin its long
journey. As with many traders of the
period, the initial journey is an
overland haul to the port complex
serving Rome, including Ostia and the
great harbor works at Portus, expanded
under emperors like Claudius and Trajan.
From here, Rome connected to the wider
Mediterranean and beyond. At the docks,
merchant shipping was constant. Our
merchant embarks on a large trading
vessel bound ultimately for Alexandria,
a key hub of Roman Egypt. Routes to
Alexandria were not always direct. Ships
might dock along the way, depending on
winds, season, and commercial needs.
Stops could include Sicily and Crete,
where merchants could exchange goods,
take on supplies, and add secondary
cargo for resale. In favorable
conditions, the sailing time from Italy
to Alexandria could be on the order of
10 to 14 days with the wind behind, but
far longer in adverse conditions and on
the return. Before continuing the coin's
journey, it's helpful to pause and
examine the role of Egypt within the
Roman Empire at this time. Egypt was a
crucial grain supplier for the Roman
world, and control over Egypt and its
shipping routes was treated as
strategically vital. Alexandria stood as
a beating heart of this system, a dense
and cosmopolitan city where Egyptian,
Greek-speaking, Roman, Jewish, and many
other communities lived and traded.
Alexandria was also a getaway to the
East. For some traders, it was a
stepping stone to the Red Sea ports, the
monsoon routes to India, and the wider
Indian Ocean exchange world. And it's
here the coin's destiny changes.
Arriving in Alexandria was intense, even
for seasoned merchants. Warehouses,
markets, and brokers moved goods at
scale. To fulfill his contract, our
merchant needs grain. He deals with
local intermediaries who can supply it.
For payment, he uses the forms of
currency common in Egypt for daily and
regional trade. Egypt operated with a
distinct monetary system for local use,
even while Roman gold could circulate as
bullion and high-value payment. And now,
the Roman aureus appears as part of the
settlement, not because it is spendable
money in the Egyptian market in the same
way it is in Italy, but because it is
portable gold with a trusted weight and
an imperial face. Once it leaves Roman
hands, it stops being Roman money and
becomes something broader, gold that can
move through many markets, prized for
metal, recognizability, and status. The
deal is wrapped up. The grain moves
toward shipment. The coin, now in new
hands, is ready for its next leg. The
gold coin doesn't remain long with a
single owner. Alexandria drew merchants
tied into networks reaching Arabia, the
Persian Gulf, and the Indian Ocean.
Goods from India and beyond reached
Egypt, and Egyptian goods moved outward
in return.
A meeting is arranged with a merchant
connected into these eastern routes. The
details vary by trader and era, but
let's imagine luxury goods, aromatics,
textiles, gems, and metals moved through
hands in long chains. In negotiation,
the aureus appears again, attractive as
high-status gold, and with a discount or
sweetener agreed, the coin changes hands
once more. Now, it's headed into a world
Rome doesn't control, the Persian Gulf
trade world. At this stage, the coin can
move through overlapping corridors, Red
Sea shipping, Arabian entrepôts, Persian
Gulf ports, and Caravan links back and
forth for months and years, often
without any single trader traveling the
whole distance. Our coin does not need
to follow only one fixed path. It moves
through multiple hands and multiple
corridors, carried by merchants who
connect these worlds. Our Eastern
connected merchant is a man on the move,
someone used to long periods in testing
environments. After stocking up on
wares, he travels the established route
from the Nile to Egypt's Red Sea ports
via desert roads and way stations
documented in ancient sources and
archaeology. At a Red Sea port, such as
Myos Hormos, one of the major Roman era
gateways to Indian Ocean trade, the next
leg involves sea travel. The destination
is the wider Indian Ocean network, but
the route can include stops. Southern
Arabia was famous for aromatics. Ports
in the region of modern Yemen, including
Qana in the Periplus tradition, supplied
frankincense and myrrh that fed ritual
and elite status across the ancient
world. In these markets, the Roman gold
is not just metal, it's an object with
cachet. Gold with an imperial portrait
is trusted because it is hard to fake,
easy to weigh, and easy to admire. So,
the coin changes hands again. From
Southern Arabia, the next leap is east
into the Indian Ocean, often timed to
seasonal winds. The target is Western
India and the ports of the Malabar
Coast, names like Muziris and Nelcynda
in the Greco-Roman sources. Now, the
coin is firmly in the Indian Ocean trade
world, far from territory where it could
be used as official Roman currency. Its
value is in its bullion and its
prestige. And this matters because India
is where Roman gold is attested in
significant quantities and where Roman
coin portraits could be seen, handled,
copied, and repurposed. From India,
trade did not end. It branched as
before. Goods and people crossed the Bay
of Bengal and moved into the Thai-Malay
Peninsula and the Gulf of Thailand. And
this is where our story's key
transformation happens because the
object found at Oc Eo is very likely not
that original Roman coin at all. If a
Roman aureus reached India, it could do
more than pay for goods. It could also
become a model. In parts of South Asia,
converting coins into jewelry is a
documented practice. Piercing them,
looping them, wearing them. And in
Southeast Asia, craftsmen went a step
further. They made gold pendants that
imitated Roman coin portraits. So,
imagine our coin reaching a jeweler. A
loop is added or a pendant is made to
mimic the coin's portrait. Whether that
conversion happened in India or later in
Southeast Asia, the broader point is the
same. The coin was being repurposed into
jewelry or its portrait was being copied
into jewelry.
Currency becomes a wearable status
symbol. Now, the coin or the pendant
made from its model made off on the last
leg of its journey. First, east through
the Bay of Bengal to the Thai-Malay
Peninsula.
And then through the straits and the
Gulf of Thailand into the trading world
that fed Oc Eo.
From here it headed toward the Mekong
Delta region. Here at Oc Eo, over 9,000
km from Rome, the emperor's face reached
its last destination.
Sold locally, either worn by an elite or
kept as a high-status ornament or used
for other reasons and then lost or
buried in the shifting alluvial
landscape. The exact final moment is
lost to time. Through whichever means it
ended up in the Mekong Delta soils,
there it remained for centuries until
archaeological work in the 1940s brought
these long-distance connections into
view. Its presence in Vietnam attests to
the staggering reach of ancient exchange
networks. And because the Oc Eo pieces
are best understood as pendants copying
Roman coin portraits, the how becomes
even more revealing.
Not Romans meeting Vietnamese traders
face-to-face, probably, but Roman gold
and Roman imagery moving into India,
then being remade, revalued, and carried
onward by South and Southeast Asian
networks into Funan ports. A Roman coin
can travel far and even when the
original does not survive at the end of
the chain, its portrait can. And this
was not a one-off. Similar Roman coin
imitation pendants are also known from
sites in Thailand, such as U Thong and
Khlong Thom, including evidence that at
least some were produced locally,
including a stone mold found at Khlong
Thom. We used one coin as our guide
because sometimes a single face on a
single piece of gold is enough to reveal
the whole system. And if one Roman
emperor's face reached the Mekong, what
else might still be buried out there
waiting?
We loved this story and we knew we had
to make a video about it. If you enjoyed
it, too, like, subscribe, and hit the
bell so you don't miss what's next.
More stories like this are in the works.
You can now explore our maps in even
more detail as prints and downloads.
Premium historical maps designed by
historians. Link below.